foreign if it ever crosses your mind
the person can't handle what you're
going to say to them what you want to
say to them if you ever think that
they're too weak
or incapable
those absolutely are key indicators that
you're in it that you're in the
caretaking side of things
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
foreign
with making people feel better when a
lot of us think of codependency we think
of alcoholism or we think of addiction a
lot of the extreme examples but
codependence is something that we really
do a lot in our daily lives and this
happens in very subtle ways in
relationships personally and in business
so today we're going to talk about the
difference between care and caretaking
so Joe today I want to talk about
something that we've all dealt with
before which is a really common scenario
where you
you want to make somebody feel better
and
you think that this is going to help and
you you do something specifically with
the goal of making them feel better and
it actually just ends up making things
worse in the long run and we've we've
talked about that in our in your courses
and that we've labeled it the term
caretaking
uh which sounds a lot like care and
people think about care as a good thing
and then caretaking becomes this thing
that kind of is a disempowering aspect
so
uh what is caretaking and how did you
come across this as a concept worthy of
inquiry semantically speaking you could
call it like codependence or caretaking
and just for the sake of this
conversation let's make
caretaking the side that's in you know
the Lexicon is codependents more on that
codependent side and caring for being
something that's not in that camp
so just that's how I use the word so I
just wanted to find that for everybody
who's listening if you heard I was
laughing as soon as you were talking
about
wanting to make somebody feel better
because that's actually the way that I
would Define the difference between
caring for somebody and caretaking
somebody is the idea that you're trying
to manage their experience and
particularly this gets particularly
dangerous when you're managing their
experience for your experience
for example the wife who comes home and
is doing everything she possibly can to
make sure that her husband doesn't get
mad at her
is she doing that to manage her
husband's emotion or is she doing that
to manage her own emotion is she trying
to avoid fear or is she trying to avoid
his anger and if she's trying to avoid
his anger
just for him
what would be the purpose of that what
would be wrong with letting somebody be
angry
people get angry all the time humans are
meant to get angry all mammals have
moments of anger what would make you
want to stop it if it isn't for trying
to manage your own experience and so
that's where codependence or in this
case what we're calling caretaking is
it's when you are trying to manage
another person's emotions through what
we call care
to make it so that you don't have to
experience your own emotional situation
you don't have to experience something
that you don't want to experience so in
a sense it's taking care of yourself for
example that wife maybe what she's
avoiding is being attacked
in anger
by somebody larger than her and so she's
trying to make him feel better trying to
manage his experience trying to tiptoe
around
the lava in order to prevent her
experience from deteriorating or going
in a direction she doesn't want that's
exactly it I'll give you an example I
had a woman come to me and she was
talking about this exact same situation
she was talking about how
my husband gets angry at me and I don't
know what to do and there's nothing I
can do and it was very much like she was
not capable of changing her reality
because she had this angry husband and
she genuinely felt that
right this wasn't something like her
mind was wanting to be a victim in this
way it was generally she felt trapped
that's the feeling that she was having
and I said ah BS you like it and she she
didn't like me saying that very much
obviously and I got a smile out of it
and she'd look perplexed and I said tell
me what would happen if you every time
he started getting angry you just got up
and you just walked out
and you just consistently did this for I
don't know let's call it 10 weeks
every time he started losing his school
you just got up and walked out
how long would he still be yelling at
you like how would this work for him if
if this anger thing that he does stopped
working or what if every time that he
yelled at you you were like yeah baby I
like to see your anger give me some more
tell me like tell me how angry you are
tell me how frustrated you are
you have nothing to be ashamed of I I
can accept your anger well how how if
you did that for 10 weeks how long would
it be that he was getting angry at you
now obviously I'm not talking about if
if he's hitting her if he's hitting her
then or being
you know physically abusive or even
mentally abusive that's not a
relationship you want to be in
and even if you are in that situation
leaving is a far better situation than
trying to make them feel better because
you're just telling them that this works
if I get angry you will stop being
yourself and you will
and you will try to manage my experience
which gives me all the power in the
relationship and so that's what
codependence is that's what caretaking
is it's when you are trying to make
someone else feel better so you don't
have to feel it and that's an extreme
version of it but there's there's
everyday versions of this too which is
the most obvious one that you see is
somebody sad
and somebody else says it'll be better
what what makes you want to take away
their sadness is it is it that you don't
want to feel their sadness is it that
you don't want to feel your own sadness
what's the problem with them being sad
sad is beautiful
yeah good cries are amazing things for
people is it because your mom and dad
told you not to cry for whatever 20
years and so now you're just doing
whatever you can to make sure that you
never have to hear tears
so that's codependence whereas caring
for the other side of the equation
caring for is when
you're moving not out of any desire to
change the person your desire is just
simply to relish and enjoy the feeling
of caring for somebody it is a an
unbelievable joy to care for somebody
and it's just a great experience to have
but you're not trying to change them in
any way their reaction to your care is
completely unimportant and the way you
can tell internally that you're in one
or the other is the is resentment
caretaking eventually will lead to
resentment in you you will start
resenting the person and they will start
resenting you
because
they have no choice but just to resent
you because you're you're treating them
like they're kids you're treating full
adults like I have to manage your
emotions I have to make sure you don't
get upset I have to make sure you're not
sad eventually the person's like screw
off
like I'm I'm capable I can take care of
my own emotions what what makes you
think that you're better than me
that's the reaction and then the person
who's caretaking is like look I've given
you all this stuff like I'm I'm
sacrificing myself
every day for you I'm not speaking my
truth I'm I'm trying to position My
Truth for you in such a way that you can
hear it and you are angry at me we'll
forget you then you know like this is
the this is the rigmarole that people
put themselves through instead of just
I'm speaking my truth to you
and that's my responsibility
and your responsibility is to have
whatever emotional reaction you want to
have to it
and I'm not going to try to change that
what about situations where the person
really is dependent in some way for
example it's a child or an elderly or
sick relative
and you know there's some extent that
you actually want to care for them and
some extent that you resent it also
but if you don't like you're not okay
with the alternative of them just being
completely left on their own how do you
how would you pick apart the care and
caretaking within that kind of situation
and how do we know the difference yeah
there's so many of these that are
they're very different from one another
a child is very different than say
a alcoholic father which is very
different than say a mother who is
bipolar which is very different than
somebody who's
developmentally disabled
to all of those are they're very
different things and everybody likes to
Clump them all in and basically them
clumping any of this in together is
saying wait a second I don't want to
stop being a caretaker because then I'll
have no control and what would my life
be without control which by the way is
the same reason that the abuser
or the bully or the Yeller
is saying like I'm not going to stop
yelling because then I have no controls
everybody's got their control in
different ways right
behind that question is mostly that
behind that kind of question is like
wait a second I there are people that I
really have to take care of
and behind that is mostly
that fear of losing the the control that
one does have so for instance with a
drug addict you know there's whole rooms
of Al-Anon built to teach
those living with addicts how to take
care of themselves and not take care of
the addict so that one's an easy one
that one's a complete illusion
when I say it's a complete illusion what
I want to say is not that the person is
bad or ignorant
they might be ignorant but they're not
bad is that they actually just can't see
through it that they've been trained
their whole life
they have been trained their whole life
to take care of people emotionally they
think it's their job they they it's like
very hard for them to see outside of
that thing
yeah but with children on the other hand
you actually do have like quite a
responsibility to take care of of kids
and yet
a lot of people caretake kids you know
please don't cry Billy it's a perfect
example of it
and so the difference the only way you
can really tell when you're at the
difference is when your resentment
starts building
when you are trying to manage their
experience so that you don't have to
deal with a certain feeling that you're
having I think back to the kid or the uh
the addiction example this is where a
lot of these topics get the response
from people like oh this sounds really
great in theory this is probably true
for a lot of people but my situation is
dire if I for example if I don't take
care of my addict brother then the next
thing that might happen is that he dies
of an overdose and that happens for real
all the time and so like somebody may be
like no I absolutely cannot accept the
possibility of my brother dying of an
overdose so I need to do at least the
minimum amount of you know caretaking or
care or or enabling that should at least
keep him alive and that can make this
really really difficult to pull apart
because a lot of people always feel like
their situation is different their
situation is not the the textbook case
theirs is actually they're trapped what
advice would you have for somebody who
feels that way and
they feel resentment and they also feel
like they have no other choice I would
say first look at the other choices you
have and really ask yourself the
question so for instance with the addict
if I don't pay for this addict to live
then they'll be homeless or if I don't
take care of them then they'll die of a
drug overdose
what makes you think that they're going
to not die of a drug overdose or not go
homeless if you're taking care of them
how does that work in your brain do you
think that every single person who has a
drug overdose is because their brother
slash sister slash mother slash father
stopped caring for them
do you think that every one of them
that's homeless is because they stopped
caring for them so taking a look at the
other side of your logic and
deconstructing it is
an incredibly important tool the
evidence that I have seen is that
the caretaking drives the person into
the addiction further and there's
evidence of this where the the
alcoholics have the hardest time
to break alcoholism are the people who
have independent wealth
and they have nobody particularly
depending on them so they have no bottom
to hit to get out of it so most of the
time the codependence is just making it
so that the person doesn't hit their
bottom
and so you're actually hurting them
you're not giving them you're again
trying to avoid somebody from feeling
pain
so that you don't have to feel the loss
of your loved one right and if you're
being honest with yourself and here's
here's the trick if you're being honest
with yourself feel the loss
feel the loss before you even make your
decision I'm not saying stop or start
just feel the loss like oh yeah if I
stop this they're gonna die feel your
person's death
mourn it go all the way through it so
that you're making decisions that are
based on what's best for them not
because you are trying to avoid the
grief right that was a really good point
you brought up there about hitting the
bottom because
a lot of these difficult emotions their
purpose is for us to feel them so that
they can teach us the lessons that
they're meant to be teaching and if
you're protecting somebody else from
feeling their their emotion and
receiving their lesson while also using
that as a tool to avoid yourself feeling
the difficulty motion and learning your
lesson then
then you really can't get out of the
pattern yeah and and take a look at it
the other way so occasionally I get to
meet these beautiful people who have
dedicated their life to caring for
a mother or father who is passing or a
child who has such bad disabilities that
they you know can't leave their
wheelchair and they've dedicated their
life to these people in a way that's
healthy like there's a care for and that
you you can spot them a mile away
and the reason you can't is because they
have just gotten so soft and their heart
is so big
there's a way in which they have used
this experience of caring for somebody
to to dissolve themselves to to
sandpaper their edges and they're just
soft people
I don't mean soft like not strong
they're far stronger than most people I
mean soft as in that they're not rigid
and if that's happening to you that's a
pretty good indicator that you're in the
caring for camp
and then there's other people who even
if they're caring for those same people
but more likely they're caring for
an addict or they're caring for somebody
who's abusive to them and they feel like
they can't get out of it
they're not getting softer they're
getting more and more neurotic that
they're getting more and more spun up
over the years they're losing friends
that they're becoming more isolated
and so that's another way of in the long
term that's another way to tell the
difference between which Camp you're in
is it softening you up is your heart
getting bigger is there less resentment
or is there more resentment and more
feeling of trappiness and more spinning
so let's talk a little bit more about
some of those subtle forms because you
know it's pretty common to talk about
like alcoholism or some of the
like some of the deeper forms of
codependence and for many people I think
that just feels like a separate category
like oh I don't have these problems
that's not in my life
um you know my life is great
everything's good and then just not
seeing that there are always like
there's only asymptotic reduction of
these you know habits it seems over time
and everybody does you know at least a
small amount of it and most people are
doing some amount of it so like in a in
a romantic relationship for example how
can you identify the the smaller forms
of subtle caretaking that are occurring
and codependence
and transform that into care I had a
friend once and he was asking he was a
he had a strong faith and he and it was
a Catholic faith and he was a sweetheart
of a human
and one day he came to me and he said I
have a hard time Joe
knowing when I am supposed to take care
of myself and when I'm supposed to take
care of others
and I said to him
wow so you're God's a masochist
explain what I'm saying is that if your
God has set up a world where it's binary
where it's either
self-love or the love of another then
something is the design that this God
has created is one that's masochistic
it's one that is to torture
and it's not the way that I see the
world working at all what I see is the
thing that is true in us that's the
compassionate treatment of ourselves is
also the compassionate treatment of the
person across from us
now everyone says well what's best for
me is you know I just want to go out and
drink but I got to take care of my kid
like is you going out and drinking or
partying is that really what's best for
you like I'm talking about what's really
best for you and what's really best for
them or somebody says what's really best
for them is if I'm just really nice and
I take care of them is that really best
for them
or is what's really best for them for
them to learn how to be independent for
them to be told the truth
so that's I think that the overarching
way that I look at this is that the most
compassionate thing that you can do for
yourself is also the most compassionate
thing you can do for someone else and I
see this all the time
when someone finally breaks through into
but this is what I want and then and
there when they're in a
relationship where they're constantly
caretaking somebody and then they're
like oh wow this is what I want
I will almost always then ask the
question and so what about that is not
the most compassionate thing for the
person who you are you've been
caretaking so that gets almost into a
different topic of like what it what is
the deeper want like you might think
that what you want is just to keep the
peace and the Harmony in the
relationship and just not to get yelled
at or not to be not have somebody be sad
at you yeah but is that what you really
want or yeah exactly do you really want
to be authentic yeah I've run into this
a number of times and
in my relationships that's exactly right
yeah so it's it's how deep are you going
to go down that want hole how how deep
are you going to go down that compassion
hole if you're going to go down
compassion to the place where
everybody's nice to each other this law
doesn't work but if you go down to the
deepest level of compassion
which is I am willing to sacrifice our
relationship for my love for you
I'm willing to sacrifice what you think
of me
I am willing to sacrifice
this person you who I love because I
know it's what's best for you then the
law works then then God isn't
masochistic but you asked a question so
I started with this
this story just so that I could say that
when people are like in the more gentle
forms of caretaking
each other there's some pretty easy
signs one is you notice that you're
managing how you're going to say it so
if you're worried about how you're going
to say it so that the person across from
you can hear it
and accept it and you've run over
multiple
Solutions multiple ways of talking to
them in your head so with the hopes that
you're going to get it so that they'll
have a different reaction than they
normally do then you're definitely in it
then you're definitely character yeah
resonate with that I've I've experienced
a lot of times where like I'll I'll have
some issue or like Challenge in a
relationship and then I'll I'll go to a
safe space to process it and like where
they aren't present so it's not really
vulnerable to them I'm just kind of
doing this processing with whatever my
group is and then I'm like oh okay great
now I've gotten to my core wants I've
gotten to my authenticity I know what I
want now what's the way that I can say
it in a quick paragraph that I can hide
behind yeah that's exactly right and
that will exactly get this point across
without me messing it up or having to
hold my ground in a sense or
truly feel into myself in the moment
I think a lot of that comes from being
from there being fear of constricting in
the Moment Like This this happens a lot
of times where when you're away from the
person that you're having this challenge
with you feel
you feel relaxed you feel loose you feel
open you can feel the love for them and
then the moment you're with them
and perhaps you're being accused of
something or you're being you're those
emotions that that are uncomfortable for
you that are being either thrown at you
or they're just coming up in the other
person and they're uncomfortable for you
then we constrict and then all of a
sudden it seems as though we lose access
to all this stuff yeah that's the trick
in all of this work all of this work is
those moments of defensiveness those
moments of resistance how do we fall in
love with them how do we fall into them
how do we open up and
allow them to permeate us the more felt
sense of it is how do we open up and let
it permeate through us
and that is the kinesthetic or the
somatic experience
and the other way to look at that is to
say oh my gosh when I get in front of
them I'm totally going to go constrict
and I'm totally not going to say the
right thing
great fantastic that's like wonderful
news it means it gives you practice it's
like the best batting cage in the world
and you can even start off the
conversation and say hey I'm nervous
that in the middle of this conversation
I am going to constrict and I'm not
going to bring my full true self here
and I don't want that what I want is to
love you with my full self
and if you see me constricting if you
see me not being myself please point it
out to me and just give me a couple
minutes or seconds or whatever I need to
get back to
being able to bring my full truth to you
what about accusations or attacks that
come as a consequence of of speaking Our
Truth in this way and it may be not just
from the person that you stopped
caretaking but it may be from your
entire friends group or your family or
everybody around you like it may be
normalized that what you are doing in
care in this caretaking
way is actually how you're supposed to
be and if you're not doing this then
you're a bad person like if you're not
enabling
your your partner or like
I mean we could talk about the addict
again or we could talk about elderly
parents if you're not taking care of
your elderly parents in a particular way
and everybody around you is
externalizing this guilt towards you
what's the way to process that yeah
that's a good question before before we
get into that there's something back
ways that I wanted to touch back on
which is how do you know when this is
happening and we talked about a couple
of the ways that you can know it's
happening but there's a really there's a
key one which is if it ever crosses your
mind
that the person can't handle what you're
going to say to them what you want to
say to them if you ever think that
they're too weak
or incapable
and or if you feel like oh if I'm going
to say this they're going to fly off the
handle at me those absolutely are key
indicators that you're in it that you're
in the caretaking side of things
if you think they're too weak then
basically you're treating them like
they're weak and they will get resentful
and if you're scared of them getting
angry then they're definitely have
learned they have definitely learned
that getting angry gets them what they
want and you're delivering it for them
so those are just two other indicators
that really let you know if you're in a
relationship that that's happening and
when you get really
attuned to this you'll just you'll
notice that it's you said it's
asymptotic
the way I'd make that very real is that
you'll just notice how often like just
listen go to the person you love
listen very carefully to every sentence
that you're speaking to them
notice how many of them are
subtle excuses or subtle
Hedges not completely owning yourself
not completely owning your experience
hedging it shaving it so that
they will think differently of you than
what you're scared they're going to
think of you
if you're scared about what somebody's
going to think about you
and you're modifying your behavior in
any way that is a form of caretaking and
so it just gets more and more subtle
it's subtle till you see it it just gets
more and more subtle a lot of what we've
been talking about seems like it's a one
against one kind of situation where
there's a person that you're caretaking
but uh if you have for example a
community
and you're concerned about what that
Community is going to think or how
they're going to respond then you're
actually caretaking them yes as well yes
the entire the entire situation yeah
that's exactly right and that can happen
in a workplace I see this in workplaces
all the time where you have a group of
people
and they're just not speaking their
truth to each other and this is death
especially for you know if it's in
manufacturing it's not as much of a
death it just means you're giving up a
massive Advantage but if you are
in like a tech or creative this is death
where people can't speak their truth and
feel really safe about it and be just
blatant and be able to be wrong and for
other people to say I don't think that's
right and for having that open
discussion that's where great things
happen and if you're going to be
inventive or creative or do something
out of the box you need that
and there are companies back to your
example whether it be everybody wants
you to take care of codependent or
alcoholic mom
or everybody wants you to you know work
from 6 a.m to 11 p.m because that's what
the company is doing and if you don't do
it then you're going to suffer the
consequences whatever that situation is
there is a real possibility that you
will be
ousted from the group yeah there's also
an equally real possibility that you
will force the healing of the group
right yeah bringing that into a business
context there's a there's a real like
tragedy of the commons-esque thing about
this where if if an entire group
is slowly trending towards optimizing
for harmony
optimizing for fitting in optimizing for
if there's an unseen uh value around to
be a team player you are staying as long
as everybody else is staying after work
and it's really getting to the point
where it's not good for anybody
individually
and then everybody also fears that if
they're the one to speak up about it
then they'll be ostracized from the
group then they're allowing the entire
group Culture to deteriorate yeah and
there's no leader meaning there is
somebody who's in charge but there's no
leadership happening and and the healthy
cultures are the one where everybody is
is acting like a leader from time to
time
and if you mute people as the boss or if
you the employee decide to be muted you
are killing leadership in the in the
group
because leadership comes from
I am going to lead the way into a new
place you don't lead the way into the
place you're at you you lead the way
into the place that you have not been or
that you are going to
and the only way that happens is being
the tip of the spear that's how
leadership works and you can't be the
tip of the spear if the whole thing is
optimizing for Harmony and or optimizing
for competitiveness and or optimizing
for
intelligence even optimization is for
what's happening right now and that
changes in business and so the people
have to change as well and new places
have to be led to from a leadership
standpoint how would you apply that to
accountability or like discipline like
with regards to say if there's an
employee that's not
that's not meeting certain criteria and
maybe the co-workers are trying to
protect them because they like the
employee and so everyone kind of hides
each other's flaws or I don't know
shortcomings yeah so the question is how
do you hold them accountable the idea
that holding somebody accountable
particularly accountable with love could
ever be a problem is a good
determination that you're in
codependence
so if I'm speaking my truth I don't want
to work with somebody who can't deliver
on time or at least tell me why they
can't deliver on time
and tell me how they're going to
compensate for I don't want to work with
that my truth is I don't want to work
with somebody like that I also notice
that people if they work like that
aren't happy with the way they work so
it's not good for them it's not good for
me and to own that want and to say this
is the reality that I'm I choose to live
in whether you're the boss or the
employee is a hundred percent acceptable
now if you say it to your boss and your
boss gets pissed and you say to your
boss again and they fire you
then you are going to get exactly what
you asked for which is a work situation
in which people are reliable
if that's how you want to work it's a
good thing that you're out of that
situation with the job
and if you're the boss then it's a good
thing that you've lost that employee
even if it's a short-term pain in the
butt because you're going to have a
long-term great team if this is the
reality and you're also going to create
a culture where everybody knows this is
how we behave in this culture and then
it just starts having a gravity of its
own
the reason that you wouldn't hold them
accountable is because you're being
caretaking and the reason that you
wouldn't fire them is because you're
being caretaking and then they will
become resentful of you and that happens
all the time in business where you see
somebody who's been trying to be nice to
their employees and the employees are
resentful and then you see the boss you
know and the group next to them and
they're dead straightforward and they're
very clear about their wants and the
expectations and they do it with love
and gentleness and they are cared for
and a deep sense of loyalty has been
created by that kind of leadership so a
lot of the times when when people start
working with a new tool like this uh
they will do what they think is actually
working with a tool for example not
caretaking and they'll actually end up
being avoiding and weaponize a tool an
example of that might be like you know
what I don't I don't care about your
feelings I'm I'm not responsible for
them uh it's it's not my job to make you
feel better and they'll say it in a way
that actually pulls them away and
creates distance
what are some ways to recognize that and
what are some other ways that that might
happen as we start to work with this the
first way that it's going to happen is
that you are going to start judging
other people who are being caretaking or
caretaking of you that's the first that
happens in the process of learning about
this
and what's actually happening is that
you are judging your own caretaker that
you have started a war with yourself
about your caretaker you've seen that it
causes you pain you see that it's
sub-optimal and then you've decided
let's make an enemy out of this thing
and try to change it which is underneath
the same thing that you're trying to do
by being codependent is trying to change
somebody else or change yourself so it's
that doesn't help it doesn't do much
it's a fine for a bit because it's part
of the process that you're going to go
through and that's it's okay there's no
no reason to start a war with yourself
over it because you're you're not going
to win
that's one of the ways that it's going
to start then the second thing is what I
like what you're saying is really true
that people will start weaponizing it
and say now I'm just going to cut myself
off from you in a different way
and our society likes to tell the story
that if you're caretaking then you're
not cutting yourself off for of people
you're you're caring for them you're not
you're not being arrogant you're not
being rude you're not being dismissive
but you're still cutting yourself off
from them because you're not telling
them your truth you're you're managing
them just in a different way and so then
all of a sudden if you decide to cut off
from them in another way like I'm not
going to talk to you or I'm not going to
basically feel or have empathy then it's
just another way of cutting them off and
in all of these things what happens is
your body will start constricting
whether you're being codependent or
whether you decide to be defensive in a
more traditional manner or cut yourself
off or then you'll start feeling your
body somatically start to tense up and
that's like the indicator that's the
main thing and then the last thing that
can happen is you can start going down
that caring for Route which is a
beautiful route and you can start
feeling how
soft you're getting the benefit of
keeping an open heart and allowing them
to feel anything that they need to feel
or want to feel
and not trying to manage their reality
and at the same time not closing
yourself down from them and that becomes
this incredibly inspiring place and
you'd start noticing how much benefit
you and the people around you get and
then you forget to drop boundaries
then all of a sudden it's like I can
just manage myself to continually be
open-hearted
instead of oh I actually have to draw
boundaries to maintain an open heart
right you can't keep loving people
without boundaries a mom who doesn't
have boundaries raises horrible children
that eventually will be very abusive to
the mom or dad for that matter so those
are some of the pitfalls that you can go
into but the biggest Pitfall is people
will get through one layer of how
they're caretaking and they think
they're through it
there's just more and more subtle ways
Corkscrew yeah it's just the corkscrew
exactly yeah it reminds me of another
another subtlety there
um
like you're you're talking about how we
will start judging the caretaking in
others so perhaps the
the progression is that we We Begin
completely not aware of our caretaking
and thinking that it is care and then we
start to become more subtly aware of the
caretaking we're like oh I'm doing
this that's bad I can't be doing that
and then we start attacking the part of
ourselves that does it which makes us
judge a part of other people that are
doing it
seems there's another layer that I've
experienced myself that happens which is
like oh you know what I'm done
caretaking I'm not caretaking anymore
and what that means is that I'm over it
I'm done I'm better all these other
people are expecting me to caretake them
and you know they just need to be
experiencing their emotions so I just
need to let them experience their
emotions because they need to process
them and then all of a sudden it becomes
about everybody else having to do their
process their and then I am just on
this pedestal of like okay I'm good and
then that has always led to some kind of
like a heartbreaker
uh yeah challenge the people I see who
really care for who are really able to
care for others without any kind of
Abandonment of themselves
they are often feel people's emotions
when the person isn't feeling their
emotions you'll see them like weep at
the
these are rare folks but you'll see them
weep at or take in the sadness that the
other person is avoiding yeah I've seen
that any way that we are
defending ourselves is an opportunity to
lean in love more and accept ourselves
and others so let's say somebody around
you has started to address their their
caretaking uh habits and they're doing
this this thing that we were just
discussing where they're starting to be
blunt and rude with you
what advice do you have for for anybody
who's who's uh working with that yeah I
mean cherish it that would be the if you
if you're listening to this podcast and
you see somebody who's finally standing
up for themselves they're going to be
wonky and weird about it and it's going
to be clunky
and it will change just like
and and that's guaranteed to change
meaning that the person who has been
codependent or caretaking and they stop
caretaking they're gonna be harsh for a
while most likely they're not going to
go straight into
loving and the reason that that's the
case is because they're so sure that if
they don't care for people people are
going to attack them
because their whole life they were
attacked when they didn't abandon
themselves for their mom or their dad or
their sister or whoever it was so
they're very sure that they're going to
be attacked and so they're preparing for
that to attack and so what looks like
they're being dicks is really them
preparing for attack yeah another sense
it's a it's the courage of them
challenging their inner assumption
that's right and just hoping that it
gets proven wrong yeah so if you see
them doing it the best thing you can
possibly do is just say I'm so glad that
you're asking for what you want
and I just want you to know I'm not
going to attack you there's no need to
be defensive
and then it and then it's super
short-lived that's the the trick the
other side which we didn't get to talk
about too much which is when you are
starting to draw these when you are
starting this new way of being of not
caretaking
most likely you are going to be a little
defensive which is going to make people
attacking you more likely so one thing
that you can do is to hold yourself
with love and care as you're doing it
and not
need to defend yourself you're just
gonna say what you've got to say and if
the attack comes you're going to allow
yourself to use it as a sandpaper to use
it as a way to to clean yourself out or
to cleanse yourself purify yourself so
that's the best way to approach it and
at the same time people are going to get
upset with you
and they're probably going to get upset
with you even more the second time or
even more the third time
if you stay in a loving non-defensive
stance then the most likely scenario is
that they will see that there's this
other way of being and they want to be
that way with you
and sometimes that won't happen and
you'll lose people but either way in a
year or two you will be surrounded by
people who want to hear your truth who
don't want you to manage them who don't
want you to
caretake them who want to be Sovereign
and empowered next to you not in you or
through you and it might be a hell of a
transition but it's unbelievably worth
it so I've got one more question for you
this came from uh from somebody within
our community
if you had to pick between a vaccine for
Coronavirus and a vaccine for caretaking
which would it be and why
wow
oh I don't want to answer this question
we don't have to we could cut that whole
thing out I know I know
yeah I don't want to answer the question
because my answer is I wouldn't pick
either
I I wouldn't pull the butterfly out of
the Cocoon because it won't be able to
fly afterwards hmm for me it would be
like do you build a vaccine for crawling
or do you build a vaccine for
in a capacity to do mathematics in an
eight-year-old it's their developmental
steps that we need to go through like
all systems require
something to challenge them so that they
can grow and be strong and evolve if
there's no challenge there's no
evolution
so I don't I don't want to get rid of
our challenges I want to learn to how to
embrace them how to learn how to embrace
the death that we Face to learn how to
embrace the
the caretaking that we do to learn how
to embrace the
the Innocence that tries to get us to
manage other people to feel safe like
that's what I want it's not to get rid
of it it's to learn how to embrace it
that's amazing well thank you very much
Joe and I just realized that right when
I asked you that question I care took
you by giving you an out
so I'm going to sit with that until our
next week
awesome what a pleasure to be with you
again Brett yeah same here once again
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]